Indeed, for several years, I did have the opportunity to work closely with Professor Eleanor Cox in teaching in the Department of Biology.
And then, for whatever reason, that did not continue.
I got, I guess, too busy when our own program over here got in full swing.
I have some regrets that that relationship did not continue strongly.
because I think that in my own experiences, my teaching of undergraduates has been a real highlight of my academic career.
And I have missed, I think there has been an opportunity missed for me in not continuing that.
Now, I agree totally with what you're saying.
give some examples from your own experience of the enjoyment and the strengthening of your own work from those undergraduate?
Oh, I think that the excitement of a young mind being stimulated to new ideas and understandings, there's just nothing to compare to it.
And can you give some examples from the experience here of where the medical program benefited of being a neighbor to veterinary medicine,
College of Science and Engineering and so forth?
Well, I think that there have been many missed opportunities.
I think that the synergism has been talked about but never fully delivered for a variety of reasons.
Antagonisms developed based on individual personality clashes that have
in large measure prevented such beneficial interactions.
And that's one of my deep regrets.
The year I served as interim dean of this college, which was in 1987-88, after the resignation of Bob Stone, I did everything I could in a short period of a year to enhance those interactions.
I remember going to a meeting of the Board of Regents to give a report on the College of Medicine and that was the emphasis of my report that we were working quite diligently to strengthen these interactions.
I worked very hard that year
with Dean Kochenauer to put together an executive MBA program for medical residents in Temple.
For whatever reason, that never came to fruition, but I thought it was one of the greatest ideas and a lost opportunity.
And you imply that Kockenauer favored it.
We both favored it.
But there was some reluctance, I guess, in the Scott and White organization to offer such an experience for residents in medicine.
But it was also the timing was not right.
Distance learning had not yet come into vogue.
And I think that may have been the biggest snag of all.
All right, now let's go back.
You entered the dean's office when?
Well, I served as Bob Stone's assistant dean for curriculum and undergraduate education for a couple of years prior to his resignation.
And in that role, what was your task?
And my task was to continue to work with the curriculum and all the other academic kinds of activities representing the dean's office in that arena.
Bob resigned.
I moved in as interim dean and was in the office for about 13 months.
I remained in the dean's office with the appointment of Richard Duvall as dean, as his principal associate dean, and remained there for the next couple of years.
What were the major problems you had to cope with that year as the interim dean?
Certainly the most vexing issue was a case of scientific fraud alleged by one of the faculty members in the College of Medicine.
And I must say it was the most difficult issue, I think, and challenge that I have ever encountered in academe.
Was the allegation against another faculty member?
Yes.
And you had to work with it?
And there were no guidelines in the university at that time on how to deal with alleged scientific fraud.
And so it was...
I'm sure that consumed an immense amount of people.
It was eventually, the fraud, the allegation was eventually substantiated.
The individual was forced to leave the university.
The individual was eventually banned from federal support for research.
What were some of the plus events of that year?
What were some of the joys, pleasures, satisfactions?
I guess the year I was in the dean's office full time, I never left my teaching responsibilities.
And I came to the classroom a different kind of person, I guess, or at least I think the students perceived that I was somebody different.
But I found the greatest joy in being able to continue my contact with the students despite the administrative load.
I didn't drop a single lecture.
I did exactly what I always did that entire year.
Do you think it would be healthy if administrators normally did?
I think that it is absolutely crucial to their survival.
If they are committed to education, that's where they, that they've got to make that commitment.
I've often thought if we required all researchers to do some teaching and all teachers to do some researching.
Absolutely.
I feel very strongly about that.
Dr. Stone resigned.
You served for about a year, and then Dr. Duvall came.
Yes.
And you stayed on as the associate.
As his principal associate dean.
And what were your responsibilities?
Well, again, in the area of I was eventually given the title Associate Dean for Academic Affairs, and so I dealt with all the issues that dealt with the educational program, faculty appointments.
What was it like in that period once the medical program becomes solid?
How difficult was it to recruit faculty?
I think that we have never had any difficulty recruiting faculty to this College of Medicine.
Why is that so?
At least, my sense is that so long as we were a college of Texas A&M University, I think that the recruitment issues are becoming much more acute with the separation of the college into a freestanding health science center under the system.
I think that in retrospect, in my own personal very strong feeling is that separation of the college from the university was a tragic, tragic mistake.
When did that occur?
Well, officially about two years ago.
Richard Duvall, the dean who was appointed in 1988, had a sense that that ought to happen eventually.
And so the seed was planted back then.
And indeed, while I remained in the dean's office, I was asked to prepare a minute order for consideration by the Board of Regents to name the College of Medicine a health science center.
recognizing that this would be a health science center within Texas A&M University, with the College of Medicine being the central program associated with the health science center.
I think that is the way it should have stayed, in my view.
I think that the separation has cut us off from what I consider to be the irreplaceable heritage of this College of Medicine, as starting on the campus of a major research-based university.
One of the problems of all medical schools is to establish an identity.
And I think that that identity is usually born from the unique character of the school.
We had some unique characters.
The separation into a health science center from the university puts us more in the pattern of all other medical schools and denies us the very attributes that I think made us special in the first place.
Do you feel comfortable in saying who the primary movers were toward the separation?
Well, I'm quite certain that Dr. Smith was one of the key movers in that direction.
It all happened during the deanship of Michael Friedland, so I'm sure that he was a party to that separation.
What was their primary argument?
I think that it was
Primarily for the purpose of cozying up to the legislature and for legislative financial support to make this program essentially equivalent to all the other medical programs in the state of Texas.
As a college of Texas A&M University, the College of Medicine did not have a direct line to legislative hearings, to dealing with budgetary issues.
But they thought they would get more money.
Yes.
So far, do you have any observation?
I think that it has worked the other way.
I think that we have gotten less.
Now that the program is a quarter of a century old, what are the trademarks of A&M medical graduates?
I think that we continue to benefit from
the small class size from the opportunities for very personal interactions between faculty and students with a very large caseload in our clinical facilities that cannot be matched in any other medical setting, certainly not in Texas.
It might surprise you, Haskell, to know that the number of patient visits to our clinical facilities in Central Texas, meaning Scott and White, the VA, and Fort Hood, that number is roughly equivalent to the total patient visits to the Texas Medical Center in Houston, which supports two medical schools, both of which are substantially larger than this one.
That's remarkable.
Isn't it?
Oh, that is good.
Good for all concerned.
Yes, indeed.
It is.
The students have scored highly on all of the...
The students have truly excelled.
I mean, far beyond anyone's expectations on their licensure examinations, the board exams.
The state examined medical jurisprudence required for licensing in Texas.
I think that our expectations have been far exceeded.
And I think that we have lived up to the original hope for this medical school, that a large proportion of our graduates would end up in primary care specialties, particularly family practice.
And I think that the numbers show that we are doing better than any other school in the state, percentage-wise anyway, in providing physicians to primary care specialties.
And the reason for that, you think, is?
Well, certainly a large part of it is role models.
I mean, I'm sure of that.
And who are some of those role models?
Well, I don't know how to answer that historically, but it doesn't hurt to have a family practice physician occupy the deanship currently.
The first woman to be president of the AMA is remarkable, and that's not lost on the students.
I think that we have a very, very strong department of family practice whose leader for that group has been for many years now, Don Cawthon in Temple.
And he has recruited a cadre of really superb family practice physicians who I think just shine with our students.
And there has been, over the years, good teamwork between the campus, Scott & White, and the VA
uh have there been any uh pebbles in the road any major problems that had to be worked out oh occasionally the va has felt that it has taken a back seat or been forced into a back seat and they're not a primary player i and that issue comes up every couple of years and they need to uh
be patted on the shoulder occasionally and told what a wonderful job they're doing.
But we've managed that okay.
And what about with Scott & White?
First rate medical institution.
It is...
an exemplary reference hospital and with a very, very large outpatient service, I think that the kinds of experiences that our students get there are unmatched anywhere.
Unmatched.
The
Looking at this 25 years, what has A&M's medical program, what fields, what parts of the preparation of these medical students have been done best and which parts need additional strength?
I think that we need to remind ourselves periodically of Jim Knight's dream for this college in educating
physicians with a very substantial humanistic sense.
I think that we sometimes get too much into the science of medicine and forget about the art of medicine.
And really that's what humanistic sensitivity means to me.
We get so carried away with the high-tech of modern medicine, but that's only part of dealing with sick people.
And I think that we don't do as well in that category as I think we could, given other circumstances that are small.
number of students we deal with, a very large faculty.
And I don't know what our total faculty size is now, but it must be six or seven hundred altogether.
And that's nearly ten faculty per student in a class.
That's a huge, huge ratio.
Can you think of any other institution that could, any other medical school that could claim such numbers?
No, I can't think of a single one.
Also, describe as much as you can financially in terms of cost to the state and so forth.
Isn't this medical school comparatively inexpensive?
Well, I haven't seen any numbers lately, and the only numbers I can recall seeing indeed are the ones I saw when I was interim dean, and that's 12 years ago.
We stood very favorably in terms of cost to the state per student with the other Texas medical schools.
We weren't the cheapest, but we were certainly not even close to being the most expensive.
And how much do we benefit by not having to operate our own hospital?
Oh, that's a tremendous asset that I think so few people realize.
I think that's one of our true strengths, that we don't need to worry about the operation of a hospital.
Among other things, it saves us a lot of lawsuits.
Indeed.
Down through the years, the typical medical student now has four years of undergraduate, typical A&M medical student, four years of undergraduate preparation.
And where do most of these students graduate?
What school or schools?
Hmm.
I don't recall seeing any information recently about that.
We still draw a fair number of our students from A&M.
There are a large number of students from University of Texas.
We get a large number of students from Baylor and Waco.
And then a smattering from some of the smaller schools around the state.
We are limited by legislative action to taking only 10% from out of state.
and so those numbers are very low.
The representation is broad, however.
We, on occasion, get someone from California or from New York State, but there's only two or three in a class, and that's a very small number.
I think that may be a disadvantage for us, that we do not have the benefit of a rather cosmopolitan student population.
Can you make any kind of generalization about the family background of the typical A&M student?
Are they working class, middle class, rural, urban?
I think that increasingly we're finding that they're coming from urban areas.
more so than initially for this program.
I think that we find a fair percentage of our students coming from professional families, that is to say physician families, either where a mother or father or both are physicians.
What is the key to their high scores on all of the
Well, I think that we're capturing intellectually sound individuals, number one, and secondly, their experience while here is absolutely relevant to their performance on those kinds of measures.
During your 25 years here, what are some of the most joyful moments you remember?
Personally?
Yes, yes.
Getting back to the classroom after that hiatus was one of the truly joyful moments in my life.
And staying in the classroom for so many of these years has been a very special opportunity for me.
Becoming involved with campus-wide activities such as the faculty senate and the design and implementation of a core curriculum, the faculty club we talked about, all of these are highlights, I think, of my
experiences at A&M.
There have been some hurtful moments.
One of the most hurtful occurred a few years ago when my successor as head of Department of Medical Microbiology decided that I was no longer needed in the classroom and I was dismissed from the teaching team.
I no longer teach in microbiology.
I hold an appointment still in that department, but I'm full-time here in the Department of Humanities and Medicine, where I do some teaching, applying my experiences from med-micro to the humanities, and maybe we can talk about that off the record.
The absolute most hurtful moment of my 25 years at A&M, however, was the day that I had my life threatened by a dean, my dean.
I didn't think that could happen, or that if it did happen,
it would go unresolved.
And this death threat was never resolved.
I think I agree with you.
I appealed directly to the president.
The president chose to take no action.
And I can tell you, Haskell, I have never been so hurt.
so wounded in all of my life.
I agree with you.
Who are the, you're now giving out Oscars, you're giving out prizes.
Who are the people that most deserve a pat on the back for the success of the medical program here, regardless of what their role, you know, pick from as broad a scope as you want to.
Who are the people that
Well, the original ideas for the medical program that came from Jim Knight, I think, still stand out in my memory.
The leadership of Bob Stone, which came at a very crucial moment in our history, I think is key to our continuing success.
The dedicated services and
good leadership qualities of people like Dr. Joyce Davis.
And our help from some of the community people like Dr. O.C.
Cooper.
These are some of the highlights that stand out in my mind.
What about some precious
moments with a student or a former student where someone has paused to stop and tell you what good teaching means?
A year or so ago, I had completed an elective course for second year medical students in this Department of Humanities and Medicine.
It was an elective program that carried the title, Germs and the Performing Arts.
in which I had the class vicariously visit the concert stage and the opera house and the drama theater and the cinema and so forth for examples of theatrical experiences that had at their roots a germ or an infectious disease.
And after the completion of that course, it was weeks, maybe months after the completion, I was sitting here at my desk by myself and one of the students who had been enrolled in that experience was walking by in the corridor and glanced in and he saw me sitting here alone.
And he came in and rapped in the door.
He said, Dr. Black, I saw you sitting by yourself.
And he said, I just had to take this opportunity to come in to thank you for that experience.
You have changed my life forever.
And I thought that was just the nicest tribute that a teacher could ever receive.
You bet.
Let's see.
And a while ago, you didn't remember any times when a student tried to pull a prank or make a joke, a tease?
No, and I still can't.
Don't I remember some kind of problem when they first had the cadavers in the basement of the Teague building?
Wasn't there something with the cleanup crew or?
I don't remember.
I think there was one of the black ladies of the cleanup crew.
That's probably true, but I just don't remember.
All right, let's see.
What about regents and or state politicians that have been positive aides to the medical program through the years?
I don't have much firsthand.
information on that.
I think that, in general, my impression is that the regents have been quite supportive of this program in medicine.
We did have a few specific allies on the Board of Regents.
Joe Reynolds, of course, stands out, and that's the regent for whom this building is named.
There was a regent from Waco.
Doug Ducluet.
Yes, exactly.
D-E-C-L-U-I-T. Doug Ducluet, I think, was a very special friend of this college, and the year I served as interim dean, we formed a very close relationship.
I think that Mr. Eller, as far as I can tell from a distance, was supportive of the College of Medicine.
But I don't know any other specific instances.
We are very proud to have a member of our charter class now join the regents in a very special role.
All right, let's see.
We're getting near the end of the questions I can think of.
Let's make believe that you have now been selected as a consultant to give advice to the leadership at whatever level regarding the medical program at Texas A&M and how to make it even more successful in the next quarter of a century.
What advice would you give them?
What should A&M be doing or not doing from now, immediate future, to make this program even better?
I think that we must never lose sight of the fact that we exist primarily for the education of future physicians.
It seems to me that I have
seen a de-emphasis in that as a primary mission.
On occasion, I think that I have seen the development of individual research fiefdoms that do not fit properly, at least into my view of medical education and what a medical school is all about.
I understand fully that research activities are essential part of a scientist's life.
But I think they ought not to overshadow the primary obligation to teach students of medicine.
And I think that's a serious issue to be dealt with.
What about the size of the program?
Oh, I would love for us to stay just exactly where we are.
For years, I taught at Baylor College of Medicine, as I said, where the class size was 84.
That's not too different from 64, and it's an okay number.
But I hope that this school will stay elitist, again, in the finest sense of the word, elitist, small.
so that there can be the meaningful kinds of interactions that take place between faculty and students in that setting.
Should it try to change the specialties in which it is doing?